to Hispanic employees, and did this treatment
change over time? Well, actually,
at the onset, let's talk about the dining hall, for
instance. Way back there, the only thing they
hired were people from Mexico, for some reason or
another, because they were considered good
cooks, I guess, and
good workers. So you're saying the dining hall was
mostly spent? Yeah, I would say that 100% were
people from Mexico. And they did a heck of a good
job, and they took good care of the students. They
were also cooks. you know, salad people, which I
don't know what you call that, but they made salads
for people. And they were also people who
took up, well, cleaned the mess afterwards, you
know, they were KP people, bus boys and what have
you. And... What about managing the place? The
manager also was from Mexico, by the name of Juan
Peña, I think his name was. Peña, Juan Peña. He was
also. But then something happened. The state
legislature passed a law that non-citizens could
not work in a state-owned institution or
state-operated institution. So abruptly, they
were all let out. And so then they hired an American
American citizens, and they hired Hispanics and
blacks and Anglos and everything else. But I mean,
everybody was treated well there. As far as the
overall campus is concerned, there weren't too
many opportunities for Hispanics to work on the
campus. I don't know why.
Even right now, the percentage of Hispanic
workers is very, very low. I mean, you've hardly
seen them. And I know that a lot of them are
qualified. And even when I was there, when I was
there at operation manager, I hired Hispanics to
work as students mostly.
office workers. I had several Hispanic office
workers. And you could see quite a few office
workers of Hispanic origin also on the campus. But
as far as a male
worker is concerned, Hispanic worker, you hardly
see them on the campus. This is one thing I don't
understand. And I think that exists now. Other
than student Hispanics, Hispanic Male workers
are very scarce on the campus. I noticed that. I was
there 52 years. And during all those years, it
never did improve, as far as I'm concerned.
Really? Never did. I don't know why. I don't
understand it, because they are good workers. Did
you ever work with any other Spanx? Hardly ever, I
assume? What do you mean, did I work with them? In
your job. Did I work some of them? Work with them.
Yeah, I had real good workers. Yeah, I had Isidro
Lopez, who worked with me for years. Actually, he
was a foreman under me, and he did a good job. Very
dedicated. I mean, he'd be the first set and the
last leave. If you needed him on a Saturday or
Sunday, he was there, no question. And I'm sure
that your Uncle Paul, who also was foreman at the
dining hall, he can tell you about the Hispanic
workers. But he would have trouble with these, you
know, with some of these other workers of other
nationalities who just didn't. And you can see it
now. You take, right now, your hardworking people
or your people from Mexico and your Hispanic
people, they're working. But I have people here
somehow, I don't know what it is, we just don't want
to work anymore. First thing they want to know is
how much you're going to pay them, and of course
that's a good thing, but how many breaks you get
during the day and how long you break, stuff like
that. Whereas you, one of these Mexican workers,
They'll work right now. They don't ask those kind
of questions. But getting back to your original
question about how to, I think your question was,
how did A&M react to the Hispanic workers or
something like that? How did they treat them? Was
it equal treatment for them? Well, there were
some, of course, there's pros and cons here. Where
I stood, I thought some were treated unjustly. But
the overall administrator did not think so. They
had some other overrulia, and that was it. But you
hardly see any Hispanic foreman anywhere in
charge of anything.
And there's never been a large influx of expanding
workers that ain't them, male that is. And I doubt
if there are too many female. Whether that's
because there's not enough skill amongst them,
because some of these jobs do require skill, like
they need carpenters, painters, electricians,
and air conditioned people, and they're all
Anglos. But even today, would you say that at
managerial levels, It hasn't really changed
much. There really aren't many Hispanics at all.
No, it has not changed much at all. I can tell you
that right now. It has not changed. Well, how did
your coworkers, non-Hispanic coworkers,
respond to you or to other Hispanics working with
them? Was there a problem there? Was that an equal
footing, I would say? You're asking how did I get
along with my... Anglo co-workers? Yes. Well, I
got along fine with them. Actually, when you come
right down to it, you could call the whole system
co-workers, that is the wage people, that is the
so-called non-faculty people, because y'all
work together for the university. And in my
capacity, since chemistry was the largest
department, largest department on campus, we
required more of the physical plant services than
any other department. And as a result, I got to see
those people more and I had a chance to work with
them and I found that they were very good to me. And I
tried to be as equal as them, be the same as them. We
worked together. And even now, when I'm retired,
and I'm retired, I meet them on the street. Boy,
they don't hesitate to go and shake my hand. We talk
about it all the time. So they actually got along
fine. So I got along with them all right. Being
Hispanic, it seemed to me that they have that same
attitude toward other Hispanics. So it might be
that maybe, I don't know what it is. I just can't put
my finger on it, why the Hispanics are not being
hired more over there. Let me ask you about, I know
you were involved on the grievances committee.
Can you tell me in what capacity you served the
grievances committee? And if there were any
special incidences that have an impact on
employees at Texas A&M that you feel you can
comment on because of that experience? Well, the
problem here is that I did not deal with Hispanics
on this. But I was the only Hispanic. on this
so-called panel. And instead of taking the
grievance, a person taking his grievances to
court, he would take it to this panel. And this
panel, from this panel, he could pick out someone
to defend him. And then the other people that were
against him could pick out someone to defend them.
And then from the panel, they had a group that would
act as judge and jury. And so they'd hear us. And the
university would accept that recommendation.
And to me, it was fair. It was fair. I think it was
real fair. Not all that. The guy who
felt that he was done an injustice could go out and
get a lawyer instead of getting one of us. And I saw
that only at one time, that's all. And to me, it was
effective in that actually there was one incident
where one fellow was more or less fired and he felt
that they did it just when he got hurt on the job and
the hospital was pretty expensive so I
represented him and as a result of
the hearing and And the discussion that went on,
actually
he was reinstated and they paid for the
hospitalization. And if I'm thinking right, I
think he's still there. But they had let him go.
They had let him go. He was fired, period. And this
is what this grievance was all about. But I never
did. Since there's not too many Hispanics, well,
no problem with none there, hardly. Very few at
that time. Now, I've been gone four years. Now,
they might have had a large group there, but I doubt
it. I don't think so. Because I don't see them, and I
don't hear anybody that I know tell me they work at
A&M except one or two, and that's it. The same one or
two that have been there 20 years, they're the same
ones there now. Something else I'd like you to
comment on along those lines. You were
instrumental in the first affirmative action
program at Texas A&M. Can you tell me how you got
that going and what exactly was entailed, what it
produced? Well, actually, I got this letter from
President Runner
asking me if I would serve with this committee of
four to come up with an affirmative action program
for the university since just about every other
university on the campus, I mean the state of Texas
had one except us. When was this? Peter had been, oh
God, maybe ten years ago, I guess, that's a good
rough guess. That's when it was, Pratt & Rudder was
still, no, no, it wasn't Pratt & Rudder.
Vanderbilt? No, no, Williamson. Okay. Chained
after it was Pratt & Williamson, that's right,
right after, yeah. So that had been about 10 years
ago. And so I thought I'd be honored to serve on it.
And so the purpose of that was to make sure that the
university would hire a fair percentage of Anglos
and Blacks. And that the university would make a
strong effort to hire Spanish and Blacks. And it
was an intricate thing to deal with. And I don't
know whether it's had any impact on hiring
Hispanics, because I thought for sure that it
would. But as far as I know, I don't think so. But the
thing is that this thing also applied for the
faculty. And of course, they hired quite a few
Hispanic faculty. And that's what I'm saying. If
the Hispanic has some sort of preparation or some
sort of an academic background, I think he can be
hired. But sometimes I wonder whether the
applicants that are turned down, whether they're
qualified or not to accept this particular job
they want. And I think the affirmative action is a
good thing to have. if they go ahead and carry it out
like it's supposed to, or if they were to implement
it like it should be, but I don't think they are.
Actually, one of the affirmative action officers
that left about four or five years ago told me that
she left because the university was not strong on
implementing the affirmative action. you know uh
whatever affirmative action uh program and uh so i
really can't tell you whether it's done any good or
not peter uh i doubt if it has of course uh president
reagan didn't want that in the country i don't
think i think he wanted to get rid of it but they
still have it at nm And according to newspapers,
A&M is doing all they can to recruit minorities,
not only in school, but also in jobs. And I don't
know just how well they've done. I don't know. Let
me change gears once again and ask you about
something that's a little more recent. The last 10
or 15 years has seen sort of a new wave of
immigration from Mexico. How do you think this has
affected the Hispanic community in Bryan? Have
these people generally been accepted? Is there a
pro and con to this issue? What's your response?
Explain that again, Peter. I kind of see what it is.
You're talking about people from Mexico now,
right? Right. The immigrants, the aliens coming
over. How has that affected this community? Okay,
you're talking about the working people. You're
not talking about... Well, I don't think there's
too many of the other. Okay, all right. Actually,
Pete... Peter, I think it's helped the community.
And I think that
people, leading citizens of the community think
that without these people, they couldn't have
accomplished what they have thus far, like for
instance, roadworks. Because of the labor force.
The labor force. At A&M, you take at A&M, all this
big building program they've got going there. If
you go there, you'll notice that so many of them,
the big majority of them, that are doing the hard
work and are doing the heavy semen work are
Hispanics. And they're the ones that are doing a
lot of the so-called bricklaying, doing a lot of
semen work, this fine semen work. A lot of them are
doing this fine hard work. And you can see that in
Brian, too. In Brian, you take younger brothers
who who is one of the largest road contractors
around here,
he'll tell you right now that without those
people, he couldn't keep up with his deadline. He
couldn't meet his deadline. And if you drive any
place while they're doing this, you'll find that
they are that there's a lot of these people from
Mexico that are there doing this hard work. A lot of
these people do a lot of work for the city of Bryan.
The city of Bryan can't find American citizens to
do this work, so they have to rely on these amnesty
people to do that. And they're the one that do your
farm work for you. They're the one that clean your
cow sheds and your horse sheds. They do a lot of
work. And now, as you know, a lot of our own here, I
don't think the black community want to do that
work anymore. They figure that you don't see black
people doing that kind of work no more. They used
to, but not anymore. They don't feel that they
should. And so if they're going to do it, then your
wage is going to go way up. And these people that are
working hard, they're working for the way you said
they are now, whatever it is. I get a lot of minimum
wage at the beginning. Do you think that there's
been any negative response, perhaps in light of
the fact that some would say this is sort of
bringing a rising Hispanic community a step back?
It's an added weight. Do you see it in that light?
And that in way to the Hispanic community? Yes.
Well, I think that
I don't think that the Hispanic community feel
that these Amnesty workers are taking their jobs
away from them. Because they probably won't do
that job either because they speak well English,
they speak good English, and they can get better
jobs working in stores and places like that. To me,
I think it helps because, especially the Hispanic
business people, because a lot of these people go
to the Hispanic business people because they can
communicate with them. And the people who are in
some sort of recreation, the Hispanic people,
these people patronize them because they
commute. No, I don't think so. I think that the
Hispanic community considers them an advantage.
being here. I know that in the past you've worked
with naturalization of aliens. Can you tell me
something about that? What exactly was involved?
Well, actually,
many, when we came back from the war, from
overseas,
at that time it finally hit me that it was not fair
that the parents of these boys that went overseas
and fought for this country, and many of them
didn't even come back, that their parents had no
rights, couldn't even vote. And they've been here
for 50 years, 20, 40 years, and still didn't have a
right to vote. And actually, those that were real
poor had not even right for welfare, not even right
for anything. And the only way that they could have
this right by becoming a citizen. And so we decided
to go ahead and set up schools. We went to the they
had a lawyer organization here. I forget the name
of it. And we went to them and they got together with
the American Legion and said they would help us as
far as the lawyers were concerned to write up some
of the things that they need to know, and the
questions and answers and so forth. Kind of a
textbook in tablet form. And they wrote this
textbook for us. Because the one from, I got a
textbook from San Antonio Immigration Service,
from Immigration Services in San Antonio.
They're very complicated, it's only English. But
they did it in English. But we found a group here
that would be able to transfer. They translated in
Spanish. So we had both of them. So they had both of
them. So then we got together. Your uncle Paul and I
got together and studied this thing, I mean,
extensively until we learned about it ourselves.
And then this information, we started having
classes and passed it on to them. And they were very
eager to learn. They learned. And not only that, we
had to go to a lot of trouble to establish a
residence for them. A lot of them came here in 1902
and couldn't prove it. So we had the right to places
where they worked or take them over there. I mean,
we made many trips out to Braggers Bottom, Waco, to
San Antonio, to places like that, the way they They
entered, and people that knew them, and we got
affidavits from these people that they worked
for. And that's how we did it. And it was a hassle.
But we made them into citizens that way. And we'd
take them to San Antonio, and they'd pass a test.
And then when they'd, right here in Braddus
County, they'd be sworn in. One time we swore in
about 30 at one time. Wow. Old people, and they
answered the question, and... They became
citizens, and they were just thrilled to be able to
vote, to have a voice in the government. And of
course, the sons and daughters that were very
proud of their parents because they were
citizens. And so we did this. And that, I think,
helped the community. And I was always very
grateful to these lawyers that started this, that
helped us. did not turn us down when we went to ask
for their help. They did it pre-charge. They
didn't charge anything. And they'd make several
trips to see how we were doing to make sure that we
were doing it right. And they liked what they saw.
What about today? I think you've also been
involved in some of this today. There's a lot of
aliens that, with the recent amnesty program,
also needed to verify it. Well, the only way I'm
involved there, Peter, is that I'm able to write
letters for them. You know, I write letters for
them and also helpful fill out because when they go
to this place where they're supposed to be
processed, they'll give them a blank and say, you
fill it or find somebody to fill it for you. Well,
it's me they find or somebody like me and we fill
these blanks based on what they tell us. And then we
have a lot of this required notarization and some
required letter attachment of some sort, and we do
that. That's the only, that's the extent I'm
involved in, but we do it, we don't charge anybody,
we never charge anybody. We never have, you know.
And so, and then anyway we can help them. Sometimes
they have problems in Mexico, and, or somebody
wants to go to Mexico, we write a letter on their
behalf to the Immigration and Activation
Service, and they'll give us what you call an
emergency permit for them to go and come back. And
that's the kind of thing we're involved in right
now. Other than that, that's it. What about
political action within the Hispanic community,
specifically politicians that come from it, the
way that local politicians have addressed the
Hispanic community or tried to gain support from
it? Can you comment on this, what it's been like?
Well, unlike many years ago, the politicians
today are really going after the Hispanic vote
because there's so many of them here now. And
because of that, the Hispanics are better off
because
they somehow or other, in certain areas,
outnumber the Anglos and the blacks in some of
these voting precincts.
And when these officials get elected, they tend to
remember that the Hispanic voted for them and they
pass legislature that benefits Hispanic. But the
Hispanic's been very active, too. If they see a
candidate that that will serve the community well
and will not forget them while they'll go out and
stump for him and do what they can to help get him
elected. But you don't see any of this, they're not
after, they're not in for selfish purposes. They
just want a good guy that is reasonable, that will
understand, that will be somewhat sympathetic
towards them. And that plot, that's it. That's all
they want. And to me, I've been with these Aspani
for so long. To me, the attitude is that if this guy
does a good job this year, then I'll vote for him
next time around. That's the extent of the
interest in politics. That's it. Has this always
been the case? To me, it's always been that way
here. Now you've got a few guys that, you know, I
think they want something out of it, but not too
many of them. They're obscured.
What about Hispanic candidates themselves?
Hispanic candidates themselves, how are they
fair to Brian? Well, we just somehow have never
gotten the right people to run for office, Peter.
The people that normally run... somehow, or not,
let me change that a little bit. I just don't think
that, they think they're qualified, but they're
not. And so they run and they keep running and they
don't get elected, then they wonder why they don't
get elected. What's happening to us is that The
Hispanic that is qualified and that could make a
good candidate or could be an asset to his
community, to Hispanic, he's not here. He gets his
education and he leaves town because this town
doesn't have anything to offer him or doesn't hire
him. This is why I know one of the members of the
Brian B., Roy Marine to be specific, they had a...
an opening here for a school teacher. And he wanted
to come back to Bryan. He's an Odessa teacher's
school. And he wrote a letter, a real nice letter,
and he made a personal visit down here. And they
gave him hope, but he never heard from them
anymore. And yet, they didn't have any Hispanic
teachers. I think only one at that time, or maybe
two. Two Herrera sisters, I think. And so Roy never
came back to Bryan. And I know that Fred wanted to
teach here in Bryan, and he never could get on. I
don't know whether he made a real effort, but he
said that when he talked to some of the people, they
kind of indicated that he didn't have much of a
chance.
This is our problem. The people that are qualified
to run for office are not around. Just close your
eyes and think how many Hispanics have graduated
from high school here in Bryan, raised here in
Bryan, that graduated from A&M or University of
Houston or Sam Houston. They're not here in Bryan.
There's only one that finally came back to Bryan,
and that's Daniel Hernandez, who got his law
degree from Georgetown. He's back. But other than
that, the rest of them are not here. They're not
here. But until these people that are finishing,
until these Hispanics that are from here, that
were born and raised here, and after they graduate
from the college can find something here, then
we're going to have this problem. We're only going
to have a blue collar running for position, and
he's not qualified for it. And the people know it.
He doesn't get elected. He doesn't have it. Well,
that's a good time for me to ask you this question,
then. What do you think are the relevant issues in
Brian's Hispanic community today? What are the
things that, if you look forward, that you think
need to be addressed or that Is this mainly it right
here, the fact that it's hard to retain a lot of
inner support in the Hispanic community because
there's just not that much to offer? Well,
actually, also another thing, too, Peter,
we're not prepared, really, some of us, to run for
office. We don't seem to want to prepare
ourselves. We don't have a, we've never had,
within our community, road models. The kind that
would set a good example for you. And we have road
models, but they're not here. You never see them,
you never hear from them, and they never address
our children. People don't know. When they come to
town, they're strangers, you know? And I think
that The Hispanic family cites that the parents do
not encourage a complete education. You know what
I mean? They say, look, go to school. Soon you can
read and write. That's enough. Get your job. Learn
to be a mechanic or a plumber or go out and work on
construction. And that's what's happening. And
the first thing you know, the boy's 20 years old, he
gets married, that's it. That's the end of it. And
then later on, he wants to run for something. He's
not going to get elected, Peter. I mean, it's our
fault too, you know. We
need people that
will stay here and succeed so that these kids can
see what success is like, can see what a successful
young man looks like. And of course, we've got a
few, but not hardly. And those somehow or other
seem to obscure themselves from the majority of
Hispanics. They seem to want to assimilate into
the American culture, more or less, because they
figure, well, that's where the money's at. I mean,
who owns a corporation here in Hispanic, you know,
families? Nobody. In other words, they're going
to be seen with those people because those are the
people that are going to make them a living. And
they don't worry too much about us, you know.
That's the problem. Well, I think that about wraps
it up. Do you have anything further to add? Well,
no, Peter, I just wasn't too prepared for this, but
I just gave it to you from the heart. I know it may not
be exactly what you wanted. You know, I've been
around here in this town for 74 years, and there's a
lot in my mind that I could say, but it'll take a long
time, and I know y'all don't have that kind of time.
But I've seen so much, and one of these days I'll sit
down and write the story of my life, and then you'll
see more of what you wanted to see. You'll see
probably not more of what you wanted to see, but
you'll see what you wanted to see tonight or hear
from me tonight. But I hope this will be of some
help. I'm sure it will, and I look forward to that.
If nothing else, this concludes the interview,
December 5th, 1989. I'm
sorry to interrupt you, but if there's anything
else I can do for you, let me know. Okay, thank you.